Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
Supervised Research Project: A guideline
prepared by
Ahmed El-Geneidy, Assistant Professor, McGill University
The Supervised Research Project is intended to focus a student's interests on a particular area of enquiry at the end of studies for a Master's Degree in Planning. It should ideally provide the transition into practice or more advanced studies.
Before submitting your SRP please make sure it is clearly written and it follows a clear path. The SRP is an academic paper and not part of an instant messaging chat so please make sure to have full paragraphs with transition sentences between them. It is the final product you are producing as part of your Master's in Urban Planning so it should be a reflection of the skills and knowledge you gained over the course of two years. Accordingly you should be producing a document that you will be proud of and use as a sample of your work when applying for jobs in the near future.
The following is a list of sections to be included in your final version of the SRP. It is important when working on earlier versions of your SRP to have this outline in mind so the production of the final version is easy. You can leave the acknowledgment, table of contents, list of figures, and list of tables till the final version so you won't be repeating the work. The abstract is usually the first section you will write and the last section you will edit to make sure it reflects your final product.
1- Title Page 2- Acknowledgment 3- Abstract 4- Table of Contents 5- List of Figures 6- List of Tables 7- Introduction 8- Literature Review 9- Methodology 10- Data if any 11- Analysis and Discussion 12- Conclusion 13- References using APA 5th 14- Appendix if any

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
Note the sections in red can be different and can change depending on your SRP topic and organization. Also they can include subsections if needed for organization.
Details about the contents of each section are as follows:
 Title Page The title page should include the following (Your SRP Title)
Supervised Research Project Report Submitted in partial fulfillment of the Masters of Urban Planning degree
Submitted by: Your name (big and bold you should be proud of your work)
Supervised by: Name of supervisor (small font he/she should not get much credit)
School of Urban Planning McGill University (Date)
 Abstract Based on personal experience the abstract is usually the most important section in your SRP or publication. Readers usually skim through papers and the abstract is the best way to do so. Your abstract should include the following:
o Problem: (2 sentences). o Purpose: (1 sentence). o Methods: (2 sentences). o Results and conclusions: (3-5 sentences). o Takeaway for practice: (2-3 sentences).
The abstract is a summary of your paper so make sure it is not longer than half a page single spaced using 12 points font. This way of writing the abstract is adapted from the Journal of the American Planning Association webstract.
That abstract should be written in both English and French. If you have a problem with the French version please consult with Prof. Fischler about that.

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
 Introduction The introduction section is always used in setting up the stage for the reader. Not every reader is an expert in your field accordingly this section is used to place your research in the larger context and introduce it, in other words, "who cares" about this work and who should be reading it. The introduction should include your main research question(s) and hypothesis. In addition it should include your specific contribution to this field. If you are conducting a case study, then your study area should be described briefly in this section. Finally the introduction section ends with an outline of your paper and how it will be organized.
 Literature review A literature review is a critical summary of previous research on a topic. It is not just a summary of the previous work. Although it should contain a summary of relevant research, it is important that you evaluate the research being summarized and highlight the relationships between various studies, and how previous research relates to your work. You need to identify which parts of previous research to discuss and how it relates to your work.
"Here are some of the questions your literature review should answer: 1. What do we already know in the immediate area concerned? 2. What are the characteristics of the key concepts or the main factors or variables? 3. What are the relationships between these key concepts, factors or variables? 4. What are the existing theories? 5. Where are the inconsistencies or other shortcomings in our knowledge and understanding? 6. What views need to be (further) tested? 7. What evidence is lacking, inconclusive, contradictory or too limited? 8. Why study (further) the research problem? 9. What contribution can the present study be expected to make?"
Source: Language Center, Asian Institute of Technology.
In the literature review section use an appropriate bibliographic referencing system. I would recommend using APA 5th. I would also recommend that you use bibliographical editing software like endnote. It is available for free through the McGill library.

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
In the transportation field there are many sources that can be used to find articles. Here are some tips obtained from Prof. Robert Bertini's guide to conduct appropriate litterateur search in transportation planning field.
With the advent of the Internet it is very tempting to think that all necessary resources for a project, thesis or dissertation will be available in full text after typing in a few words at Google.com. This notion should be discarded immediately. For transportation research TRIS is one of the most comprehensive search engines in the transportation field. If you are searching for Urban Planning topics EBSCOhost is a reliable source for this field. Some researchers use google scholars, which is another search engine. Scopus is another good place to search for articles. If you have a specific article and you would like to know other articles that cited it Scopus is a good place to search as well.
Another way is to search the databases inside certain journals. The following is a selective listing of the some major journals covering the transportation engineering and planning arena
Access Accident Analysis and Prevention Annals of Regional Science Canadian Journal of Urban Research Computers Environment and Urban Systems Environment and Planning Part A. Environment and Planning Part B. Planning and Design Environment and Planning Part C. Government and Policy Environment and Planning Part D. Society and Space Environment and Behavior Housing Policy Debate Journal of Maps International Journal of Sustainable Transportation International Journal of Transport Management Journal of Advanced Transportation Journal of Economic Geography Journal of Planning Education and Research Journal of Planning Literature Journal of Public Transportation Journal of Regional Science Journal of Safety Research Journal of the American Planning Association Journal of the Transportation Research Forum

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
Journal of Transport and Land use Journal of Transport Economics and Policy Journal of Transport Geography Journal of Transportation and Statistics Journal of Transportation Engineering (ASCE) Journal of Urban Design Journal of Urban Economics Journal of Urban Planning and Development (ASCE) Metropolitan Universities Journal Networks and Spatial Economics Regional Studies Transport Geography Transport Policy Transport Reviews Transportation Transportation Journal Transportation Research Record Transportation Research. Part A, Policy and Practice Transportation Research. Part B, Methodological Transportation Research. Part C, Emerging Technologies Transportation Research. Part D, Transport and Environment Transportation Research. Part E, Logistics and Transportation Review Transportation Research. Part F, Traffic Psychology & Behaviour Transportation Science Transportmetrica Urban Affairs Review Urban Geography Urban Studies
 Methodology
In this section you should be explaining the methodology that you plan on using in your research and how you are planning to answer your specific research question. If you are using a statistical modeling approach, explain your models and the rational of having each variable and the expected outcome based on the systematic literature review you did earlier. Linking back your methodology to the literature is an important point. If you will be using abbreviations in the variable names you should define them in this section. If you are working on a complex issue then developing a flow chart or a diagram that explains your research should be helpful in simplifying your methodology.

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
 Data In this section you need to explain the data you are using in this research. Including a summary statistics is important for quantitative studies. When including summary statistics make sure to limit the number of decimal places to 2. If you are using photos obtained from other sources you should state the source of the picture below it. You can include a map of your study area in this section. The following is a sample of a map that shows route Saint-Michel.
Figure 1: Study Route It is also important to note a case study section can be present prior to the methodology section. Accordingly the data section will be irrelevant in this case.

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
In some cases you need to display the entire region so you can use something like the below map.
 Analysis and Discussion This section contains the output of your analysis. It should also include a discussion of the statistical output or the developed models. Interpret the meaning of the findings for example what does it mean if a certain variable is statistically significant. Are the result consistent with previous research or what you have in here is a breakthrough since no one has done similar research before. Did the statistical models offer new research questions that need to be addressed in the future. Link back your finding to the literature if you are testing some data or if you are finding similarities in your finding with previous research. If you are not using statistics this section should be more of an in-depth discussion of your research and the findings you are trying to raise. Referencing previous work in this section should be minimum and only when needed.

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)

Here is a sample of regression output

TABLE 4: Trip distance linear regression models

Variable

Car Bt

(Constant)

2.26 0.01

Sex

-221.43

-0.39

Age 7.01 0.34

Number of Trips

-274.51

-2.25**

Shopping Trip Dummy

436.93

0.59

Entertainment Trip Dummy

813.91

1.20

Home Start Dummy

833.36

1.32

AM Trip Start Time Dummy

1403.81

1.76*

PM Trip Start Time Dummy

1177.57

1.62

Saint-Laurent Dummy

2185.84

2.31**

Saint-Hubert Dummy

1930.09

1.66*

Ontario Dummy

1436.74

1.49

Median household income (per $1,000)

36.38

2.82***

Diversity Index

140.02

1.69*

R Square

0.100

N 359

Dependent Variable: Trip Distance (m) * 90% significance level | **95% significance level | *** 99% significance level

The analysis section can be divided to sections depending on your study. A complex study can be easily presented when it is divided to small sections.

 Conclusion The conclusion is the last section you will be writing in your SRP before you revise your abstract to reflect your final findings. The abstract should include a summary of the findings from this research. Think in terms of generalizations rather than specifics related to your project or case. What can others learn from your paper and what are the general policy implications of your research. Who can benefit from your findings and how he can do so is also important. There is not a perfect study accordingly you should mention your study limitations and assumptions you made to reach these conclusions, if any was made. Future research is an important element to include in your paper, stating the next steps or other analyses that can be generated based on your study. Any general recommendations would you like to make for the general audience should be stated in this section as well.

Transportation Research at McGill (TRAM)
 References The list of references should be following an appropriate referencing style. You cannot make up your own style. I personally prefer APA 5th. Again using bibliographical software like endnote should help you dramatically in getting this section done easily. You can obtain endnote for free through the McGill library.
 Appendix An appendix should contain any extra work you would like to include to your SRP or paper. Removing the appendix should not have any effect on your document. An appendix should contain any extra work developed in the process or detailed information that helped in generating the study.
Credits During the preparation of this document I did consult several guidelines developed by others, accordingly mentioning their names in here is a must.
 Professor Robert Bertini's Transportation Research Guide.  Professor Kevin Krizek's writing rules and check lists.  Professor Raphal Fischler's A Planners Writing Guide.

