Diagnosing Transportation: Developing Key Performance Indicators To Assess Urban Transportation Systems
Supervised Research Project Report Submitted in partial fulfillment of the
Masters of Urban Planning degree
Submitted by: Yousaf M. Shah
Supervised by: Professor Ahmed El-Geneidy
School of Urban Planning McGill University 26th July, 2012

Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank Professor Ahmed El-Geneidy for his availability and guidance during the development of this research paper. I am grateful to Kevin Manaugh, who offered to be a second reader under a tight timeframe and provided very helpful feedback. A special thank you is also reserved for Professor Madhav Badami, who helped in framing the initial research and theory behind the project. Positive vibes go out to Brendan Rahman and Dea Van Lierop, who offered to read over my drafts and provided advice on both technical issues and writing.
I'd also like to extend my gratitude to Mr. O.P. Agarwal, who suggested the topic of this paper and provided the initial framework for the design of this project.
A big thank you also goes to the Class of 2012, who are some of the most talented people I've had the pleasure of studying and working with.

Abstract
Rapid urbanization is putting pressure on transportation agencies to respond to increasing demand for greater access to services. In response, policy makers, faced with limited budgets and time constraints, are looking for tools and processes to identify priority problems in a timely and cost effective manner. Rapid assessments can be performed using a diagnostic study that can identify cities' individual problems within the global context. Using a series of performance indicators based on a review of research and practice from around the world, this paper assesses different cities' transportation networks. The performance indicators rank cities according to an overall score as well as different categories of transportation performance. Such an approach allows planners to identify priority problems in the transportation network and design targeted solutions. The final results benchmark the performance of transportation systems according to peer cities with relatively similar sizes. Such a process assists in benchmarking performance while accounting for context, so that appropriate best practices can be shared between cities around the world.

Abrg
L'urbanisation rapide exerce une pression sur les agences de transport afin qu'elles rpondent  la demande croissante d'un plus grand accs aux services. En rponse, les dcideurs, confronts  des budgets limits et  des contraintes de temps, sont  la recherche d'outils et de processus pour identifier les priorits de manire efficace et rentable. L'valuation rapide de ces priorits peut tre effectue  l'aide de diagnostic permettant d'identifier les problmes spcifiques  chaque ville en les plaant dans un contexte mondial. Rfrant  une srie d'indicateurs de performances base sur une revue de la littrature et des expriences internationales, cette tude se propose d'valuer les rseaux de transport de diffrentes villes. Les indicateurs de performance choisis permettront de classer les villes selon leurs rsultats gnraux ainsi que selon leur performance dans diffrentes catgories spcifiques. Une telle approche sera en mesure de faciliter la tche des planificateurs dans l'identification des priorits d'action afin d'amlioration l'accs des services de transport dans une ville. Les rsultats finaux permettront galement de comparer les performances des rseaux de transport entre des villes de tailles relativement similaires selon un mme standard, facilitant ainsi l'analyse comparative des performances tout en tenant compte du contexte dans lequel il s'inscrit, de sorte que les meilleures pratiques puissent tre partages entre les villes des quatre coins du monde.

Table of Contents
Introduction................................................................................................................................................. 1 Literature Review ........................................................................................................................................ 5 Methodology............................................................................................................................................. 13 Information and Data Sources ................................................................................................................ 17 Policy and Research Analysis .................................................................................................................. 25 Analysis and Assessment ......................................................................................................................... 35 Conclusion and Recommendations for Further Study......................................................................... 49 References ................................................................................................................................................. 53 Appendix I: Complete list of Indicators in policy and research documents...................................... 58 Appendix II: Cities assessed according to the source of data used................................................... 61 Appendix III: Normalized Results............................................................................................................ 62 Appendix IV: Raw Data............................................................................................................................. 64

List of Tables Table 1: Indicators from Transportation Policies and Plans......................................................................... 18 Table 2: Categories of Performance Indicators................................................................................................. 19 Table 3: Indicators from International Agencies and NGOs ........................................................................ 20 Table 4: Indicators taken from Academic Research ........................................................................................ 21 Table 5: Goals in Urban Policy................................................................................................................................. 25 Table 6: Selected Indicators per Goal and Frequency of Use...................................................................... 27 Table 7: Final set of indicators to be used.......................................................................................................... 33 Table 8: Population Groups...................................................................................................................................... 35 Table 9: Data for calculating Z-Scores and Normalized Scores ................................................................. 47
List of Figures Figure 1: Geographic distribution of selected cities ....................................................................................... 22 Figure 2: Rankings for Cities with fewer than 1 million people .................................................................. 36 Figure 3: Rankings for Cities with 1 to 2 million people ............................................................................... 37 Figure 4: Rankings for cities with 2 to 5 million people ................................................................................ 39 Figure 5: Rankings for cities with more than 5 million people ................................................................... 40 Figure 6: Cities ranked by Population and Cumulative Scores ................................................................... 42 Figure 7: Cities ranked by GDP per Capita and Cumulative Scores .......................................................... 44 Figure 8: City rankings by geographic distribution......................................................................................... 46

Y. Shah
Introduction
Despite pressure on governments to respond to rapidly increasing demand for greater access to services, policy makers do not always have the resources to undertake comprehensive research for informed assessments. In response, there is a growing need for tools to identify priority problems in a short time and at a low cost (Leitmann & Program, 1993). These tools can then be used to develop a broad and strategic transportation management plan. Additionally, as investment in transport infrastructure continues to be seen as a means of providing links towards competitive economic advantage (Dimitriou & Gakenheimer, 2011; Peters, Paaswell, & Berechman, 2008; Sandercock, 1998), the use of prioritization tools will also help planners identify how to best allocate infrastructure investment (Westfall & de Villa, 2001). However, before comprehensive solutions can be identified to address transportation problems, a diagnostic study needs to be performed to identify cities' individual problems within the global context.
The rationale for a diagnosis is premised upon the practice of identifying transportation problems through the use of key performance indicators (KPI). Drawing on the concept of the "wicked problems" presented by Rittel and Webber (1973), the selection of KPI and how they are measured affects the nature of the problems identified. However, transportation plans are often developed without taking into consideration such indicators. Plans may be attempting to alleviate symptoms of larger issues rather than the actual problems facing a city's transport infrastructure. This paper proposes a diagnostic tool to assist in developing an initial review of the current state of a city's transportation network. The tool utilizes a series of performance
1

Y. Shah
indicators, based on research and practice from around the world, to assess different cities' transportation networks. The results rank cities and allow a comparison of transportation systems between cities with similar conditions. The intent of such a comparison is to benchmark the performance of a city's transportation system according to peer cities with relatively similar networks. This approach helps designate key problems that account for context.
Comparisons between cities also help to integrate the concept of peer-learning into transportation planning. One approach is South-South cooperation, an effective tool used by the World Bank to arrive at solutions for developing countries. As defined by the World Bank Institute, South-South cooperation is "an exchange of expertise and resources between governments, organizations, and individuals in developing nations" (The World Bank Institute, 2012). A diagnostic tool that can help compare cities according to similar conditions will help in establishing exchanges that are sensitive to the local situation. For example, while London may have developed an innovative approach to public transportation, its solution may be dependent on factors that would disqualify the same solution from succeeding in Mumbai. Likewise, blanket approaches as a result of regional or nationwide censuses can be avoided for more targeted interventions.
This paper addresses three questions: what kinds of transportation performance indicators need to be measured; what kind of readily available data is appropriate for measurement; and how can results be compared to account for context?
The report is organized as follows; firstly, a review of research on transportation performance indicators is conducted to develop a guideline for the selection of transportation performance indicators. Secondly, transportation plans of a number of cities and metropolitan
2

Y. Shah regions are analyzed to determine urban transportation goals and the indicators used to measure them. Thirdly, a methodology section frames how the analysis is undertaken and presented, followed by a section which identifies sources and validity of the data used for this study. Finally, a diagnosis is performed according to the composite indicators with available data. Results are presented and recommendations made for moving forward.
The final output of this project is a set of key performance indicators that measure transportation performance according to common goals and objectives of transportation agencies at different levels of governance. Aligning indicators according to a broad criterion of goals helps to harmonize performance measurement between local, national, and international agencies. The final set of core performance indicators can be used by development and planning agencies to evaluate the current state of transportation in cities.
3

Y. Shah
4

Y. Shah
Literature Review
Transportation planning's traditional focus on operational efficiency has been tempered by impacts on the environment, the economy, and society (Dimitriou & Gakenheimer, 2011). As a result of globalization and the role of transportation in the economy, the combination of major issues and responses around the world suggest two major themes that govern 21st century transportation planning: competitiveness and sustainable development. Cities are increasingly viewed as logistic centres in a globalized marketplace; the focus is on competition, rankings, and relative performance compared to peers rather than absolute performance (Dimitriou & Gakenheimer, 2011; lengin, Kabak, nsel, Aktas, & Parker, 2011). Competitiveness is measured by a number of international agencies such as the World Bank Group (measuring Gross Domestic Product, or GDP), the United Nations (measuring the Human Development Index, or HDI), and the World Economic Forum (measuring the Global Competitiveness Index, or GCI). Measures and scores of competitiveness provide rankings which can serve as benchmarks for policy-makers and other interested parties in judging the success or relative position of their nation or city within a global context (lengin et al., 2011). Using a ranked score is one way to interpret the value of a city's transportation performance where benchmark data is not available. Additionally, sustainability is becoming an overarching concept behind urban transportation planning as a response to rising motorization and the ensuing public health and environmental risks (Dimitriou & Gakenheimer, 2011). The following literature review further defines sustainable development in transportation, which is the focus of this section. The theoretical basis for the use of indicators in transportation planning and policy is then explored to define a methodology for the selection of indicators for this project.
5

Y. Shah
To define transportation system sustainability, two questions must be answered: what is it and how is it measured? `Sustainability' is generally defined according to the desired results depending on the emphasis of the study or policy (Jeon & Amekudzi, 2005). The phrase "Sustainable development" has no universally agreed upon definition beyond that of the Brundtland Commission (Briassoulis, 2001), which is referenced in a number of studies on sustainable development indicators (Berke & Maria Manta, 2000; Haghshenas & Vaziri, 2012; Jeon & Amekudzi, 2005; Tanguay, Rajaonson, Lefebvre, & Lanoie, 2010). Combining the Brundtland definition of sustainable development with the practice of planning, "Planning for sustainable development" is a spatial design process for achieving and maintaining stable or increasing levels of welfare over time (Briassoulis, 2001).
In North America, and in particular in the United States, although various agencies have incorporated sustainability into their visioning and planning exercises, no comprehensive definition of urban transport sustainability is identified. However, most plans propose an "operational definition" that rests on attributes of system effectiveness, efficiency, and impacts on the economy, environment, and society (Jeon & Amekudzi, 2005). Gleason and Barnum (1982) define efficiency as "doing things right" and effectiveness as "doing the right thing." Efficiency indicators measure "the degree to which resources have been used economically" (Gleason & Barnum, 1982). Traditional efficiency indicators have a tendency to be biased towards cost savings at the expense of service increase (Gleason & Barnum, 1982; Li & Wachs, 2000). The research recommends that a single ratio is inappropriate for all situations; therefore, multiple measures are needed to identify points of convergence between cities and develop an unbiased assessment (Gleason & Barnum, 1982; Westfall & de Villa, 2001).
6

Y. Shah
Efficiency measures the operational performance of the system and effectiveness measures a transportation system's progress in achieving policy goals. However, the words are often used interchangeably and their meanings confused. Because effectiveness aims to measure goal and objective achievement, potential indicators should be identified and selected after goals and objectives have been formulated (Gleason & Barnum, 1982). Binding performance indicators to policy outcomes is useful to the purpose of this project because it helps to answer the first question: what kind of indicators should be measured? By drawing upon indicators used in transport policy documents, the selected indicators will inform how urban transportation is actually measured and evaluated in different cities around the world.
Policy-related indicators are based on the social indicators movement of the 1960s and are currently in use by the World Bank and the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UN-Habitat). This approach stems from government or community concerns and is directed towards the formulation of public policy or strategy. Three types of indicators are encountered in the policy-related category:
1. Performance indicators: measure whether an agency or entity is meeting desirable aims 2. Issue-based indicators: draw attention to a particular issue, such as crime and safety,
unemployment, sprawl, air quality, etc. 3. Needs indicators: aim to allocate resources to needy target groups.
Policy-based indicator systems tend to view a sector holistically and intend to foster dialogue between the different stakeholders in urban development (Westfall & de Villa, 2001). A holistic approach is important in dealing with externalities; since interventions will have unintended consequences it is important to try to identify all the potential effects (Gleason &
7

Y. Shah
Barnum, 1982). The difficulty with using this approach rests with trying to consolidate concepts that don't have clear or easy relationships, such as "size, complexity, and level of wealth" (Westfall & de Villa, 2001). Regardless, a number of conventional indicators, such as demographics, measures of economic development, basic health, and educational achievement, are readily available and comparable (Westfall & de Villa, 2001).
On top of traditional indicators that focus mainly on demographics, mobility, costs, and benefits, new approaches to transportation indicators also measure accessibility, safety, and environmental performance (Tiwari & Jain, 2012). Accessibility is measured by a range of indicators from basic data such as average speed and travel time to spatial and utilitarian investment decisions based on individual perspectives of travel. Transportation safety levels can be adequately measured by traffic fatalities (Tiwari & Jain, 2012). Gudmundsson (2001) reviewed a number of transportation plans and policies in North America for environmental and sustainability indicators and found the literature to identify them according to two groups; quality of life and environmental and resource conservation. Examples are indicators for land use, air quality, noise, fuel use, recycling, and customer satisfaction with environmental decision making. However, while many agencies used the same few environmental measures, most of them focus on air pollution. This can either be in terms of tons of transportation emissions, or population living in areas where air quality is not up to standard based on regulations (Gudmundsson, 2001).
Having developed an understanding of the theoretical basis of developing performance measures, the following case studies describe the usage and evaluation of indicators in transportation planning. A number of studies and projects have been performed in the past that
8

Y. Shah
assess transportation indicators for appropriate use and implementation. At the corridor level, Tiwari and Jain (2012) illustrated that traditional indicators favour free movement of vehicles without taking into account capacities and road usage by other modes. From an infrastructure investment perspective, Li and Wachs (2000) showed that the choice of indicators can have starkly variable results. The results of the corridor level studies support the initial claim of this paper that the selection of performance measure affects the identification of key problems.
On a global level, Westfall and de Villa (2001), in cooperation with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), prepared a city performance system that measures urban development and compares results across 18 cities in Asia. The Cities Data Book measures city performance according to 140 indicators consolidated into a "City Development Index (CDI)," which is a mean calculation of the results of a number of sectoral indexes: infrastructure, waste, education, health, and product.
The Economist Intelligence Unit (2009), in partnership with Siemens AG, developed the Green City Index (GCI), an indicators-based evaluation project that looked at the performance of cities around the world in terms of environmental sustainability. Similar to the goals of this project, the GCI is meant for city administrators, development agencies, and NGOs who wish to report on sustainability performance. Cities are ranked and compared by continent, following the same methodology but with variations in the selected indicators and criteria for assessment. The Index is ranked according to a score based on eight categories with a total of 30 indicators, both quantitative and qualitative. Indicators for each category are weighted according to a criteria set via stakeholder consultation; each category is then weighted equally to calculate the Index. The final result is an overall ranking of scores for each city, as well as ranking by category.
9

Y. Shah
Similar to the Green City Index, Siemens Canada Limited (2010) also publishes "Complete Mobility," a series of research projects that look into the transportation infrastructure of cities in Canada through a set of 15 performance indicators and compares the results according to different policy scenarios.
IBM, as part of the Smarter Planet Series, conducted a survey on traffic congestion titled "2011 Commuter Pain Survey." The survey attempted to evaluate commuter's levels of satisfaction with the levels of congestion in 20 cities around the world. The final results ranked the cities according to ease and perceptions of travel.
As the research shows, the selection of key performance indicators (KPI) and how they are measured affects the nature of problems identified. The definition of sustainability in visions and goals has an effect on the indicators and metrics chosen. Although the three dimensional framework is used universally (economy, environment, and society), each agency/study may use different indicators to measure each dimension (Jeon & Amekudzi, 2005). Regardless, the relationship between indicators and strategic plans follows a logical path: norms ("poverty is bad," "cities should be managed well," etc.) define policy objectives, which are used to identify indicators, that are then translated into action plans (Westfall & de Villa, 2001).
Research exploring the identification and formulation of indicators for transportation is abundant. However, only corridor-level studies attempt to evaluate the indicators. Most global studies reviewed generally stop at providing a list of recommended indicators for use, which are arrived at through stakeholder consultations. Those studies that evaluate the application of the indicators also largely focus on overall city performance. The Cities Data Book and the Green City Index evaluate a small number of urban transport performance indicators as part of a larger
10

Y. Shah evaluation of urban productivity and sustainable development. To date the only projects identified in this research that utilize indicators for global urban transportation networks are the Complete Mobility series by Siemens Canada, the Commuter Pain Survey by IBM, and a similar study by Haghshenas and Vaziri (2012).
The benefits of performance measures have been debated since the 1990s. Nevertheless, their use has steadily risen over the years, especially in larger cities in North America (Folz, Abdelrazek, & Yeonsoo, 2009). Using lessons learned from transportation research on the use of performance measures, the following section frames a methodology for selecting the indicators to be used for this study.
11

Y. Shah
12

Y. Shah
Methodology
To select the indicators for this project, a qualitative content analysis of transportation plans and policy documents is performed to identify the most commonly used indicators around the world. However, a general criterion for selection must first be established. The Lincoln Institute of Land Policy report on Smart Growth Policies in the United States identifies three principles for the selection of indicators (Ingram, 2009):
 Validity  the indicator must have a direct linkage to a relevant policy intervention  Availability  the indicator must be quantifiable with easily accessible data  Reliability  the data must have been gathered by a public or governmental authority
The first step is to review the goals of the transportation plans. After goals are identified, they are placed into a set of categories to directly relate goals to indicators. Many plans do not relate goals to their relative performance measures, while others have clearly delineated performance measures for each goal. Categorizing the goals makes it easier to organize the performance indicators; thus making it easier to identify which indicator is commonly used to measure which goal or theme. Indicators are then identified in three sets of documents: transportation plans, transportation studies by international agencies, and articles from published research.
The indicators from the three sets of documents are cross-referenced against each other to develop a long list of indicators, which are then shortened to common indicators in use (used in more than one plan/study). Tying the list of common indicators to the goals/themes of the study satisfies the first criteria in the selection of indicators: validity  by establishing a direct
13

Y. Shah
linkage to a relevant policy intervention. Having selected the common indicators, a final list of indicators is developed based on availability of data to satisfy the second criterion of selection.
Following the selection of indicators and collection of data, the information is compared and evaluated. Previous work in this area has focused on either establishing a single measure for evaluation (Gilbert & Tanguay, 2000) or used a composite index based on weighted average scores (Westfall & de Villa, 2001). However, in order to normalize the results so that indicators and scores can be measured and compared across cities a standardization technique must be applied. Standardization can address difficulties posed by the exaggerated influence of some indicators over others (especially in comparing between, for example, percentages and real values). The most common approach to standardization in performance indicators is a Z-Score (Wong, 2006), the results of which are added using equal weights to derive a final score. This approach is the most widely utilized due to its simplicity (Hobbs & Meier, 2000). In order to establish a contextual relationship, cities are grouped according to population size: Small (under one million), Medium (one to two million), Large (two to five million), and Very Large (greater than five million). Z-Scores for each group are calculated using the average and standard deviation for the respective group. Indicators are also assessed on whether higher order numbers denote a positive or negative relationship. For example, higher travel times would denote lower access to services, so the resulting z-score is multiplied by -1 to establish a negative relationship. Likewise, higher speeds denote lower congestion and a more efficient transportation network, so a positive relationship of higher order z-scores is preserved. The result of each category is normalized to a score from 0 (lowest) to 5 (highest) so that ranking is easier to interpret. A cumulative sum of all the category scores is used as the final score of
14

Y. Shah transportation performance of each city. Normalized scores allow rankings to place each city's transportation system in context with its peers around the world. This will help to answer the third question of this study: how to compare the results to better establish context.
The following section introduces the plans and studies used to derive the final list of indicators, the sources of data used to conduct performance measurement, and the final list of indicators to measure transportation performance.
15

Y. Shah
16

Y. Shah
Information and Data Sources
To develop a list of indicators that can provide a comprehensive assessment of transportation systems around the world, three sets of documents are reviewed. Indicators in city plans provide measures that are commonly used in transportation planning. Indicators taken from international development agencies and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) help identify measures used in global transportation policy. Finally, indicators used in academic research determine those measures that should be used for transportation system assessment.
The first review focuses on transportation plans in the US, Canada, UK, South Africa, Australia, New Zealand, and Singapore for recently published plans in English. Other Englishspeaking countries were considered, but policy documents were either not available or not immediately accessible. The selection of the cities was based on two criteria: first, that the city has a population in excess of 0.5 million and second that it has a plan or policy published since the year 2000 with clear transportation goals and performance indicators. The final list of transportation plans/policies consulted is provided in Table 1:
17

Y. Shah

Table 1: Indicators from Transportation Policies and Plans

Country Australia
Canada Canada Canada
Canada
Canada

City/Region/Authority
Department of Planning and Infrastructure, New South Wales
City of Calgary
City of Ottawa
Metrolinx, Government of Ontario
Translink, Metro Vancouver
Ville de Quebec

New Zealand Auckland Regional Transport Authority

Singapore

Land Transport Authority of Singapore

South Africa City of Johannesburg

United Kingdom Greater London Authority

United States

Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization

United States The City of New York

United States Houston-Galveston Region

United States Los Angeles County

United States

Metropolitan Transit Commission of the San Francisco Bay Area

Policy/Plan Title Metropolitan Plan for Sydney 2036
Calgary Transportation Plan 2009 Transportation Master Plan The Big Move: Transforming Transportation in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area Transport 2040: A Transportation Strategy for Metro Vancouver, Now and in the Future Sustainable Mobility Plan: Transportation for Better Living Our World Class City: Auckland Transport Plan 2009 Land Transport Masterplan
Integrated Transport Plan 2003/2008 Mayor's Transport Strategy Journey to 2030  Amendment: Transportation Plan of the Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization PlaNYC: A Greener, Greater New York Bridging Our Communities: The 2035 HoustonGalveston Regional Transportation Plan Update 2009 Long Range Transportation Plan Change in Motion: Transportation 2035

Year 2010
2009 2008 2008
2008
2011
2009
2008
2003 2010 2009
2007 2011
2009 2009

To begin assessing each policy for goals and indicators, a classification system to group the information into common themes is required. While most studies that focused on sustainable transportation organized goals and indicators according to the standard threedimensional framework (environment, economy, and society), the city transport plans and
18

Y. Shah

policies did not. The categories used for this report are based on the goals of the plans and a

study by Cambridge Systematics (2000). Goals and objectives in most transportation plans were

organized according to the categories defined in Table 2:

Table 2: Categories of Performance Indicators

Category Affordability and Accessibility
Mobility
Economic Performance
Quality of Life
Environmental and Resource Conservation Safety Operational Efficiency
Infrastructure Condition and Performance

Description
A person's ability to reach a service in reasonable time, while factoring in the density of the road network, and the financial burden of transportation on average incomes.
The characteristics of a trip made, choice of mode, and the ease of travel
Economic impacts of the transportation system, such as costs of congestion, as well as benefits, such as cost savings due to performance improvement
Qualitative and difficult to measure indicators such as aesthetics, sense of community, and sense of satisfaction
Natural resources consumed, waste emitted, or energy saved
Incidences of injuries, fatalities, or crime on transport networks
Use of resources towards a level of output, such as costs and revenues
The state of the physical infrastructure of the transport network

Due to the difficulty of finding copies of transport plans in English from developing countries with clear performance indicators and data measurements listed, the plans listed are taken mostly from cities in developed countries. However, many urban transport policy papers from the developing world that were readily available on the internet were published by international agencies such as the World Bank. Therefore, indicators can be tied to developing countries by comparing city goals and indicators to those of international agencies and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) who have conducted performance evaluation of transport
19

Y. Shah

networks in the developing world (such as the Cities Data Book by the ADB or the Global Urban

Observatory of UN-Habitat). To take a more global outlook, however, studies are taken from all

over the world and look at both developed and developing countries. These studies used are

listed in Table 3:

Table 3: Indicators from International Agencies and NGOs

Agency Asian Development Bank (ADB) Embarq: The WRI Institute for Sustainable Transport International Association of Public Transport (UITP) Lincoln Institute of Land Policy
Partnership for Sustainable Urban Transport in Asia (PSUTA) Pembina Institute United Nations (UN-HABITAT) The World Bank

Study Cities Data Book: Urban Indicators For Managing Cities India Transport Indicators

Year 2001 2007

Report on Statistical Indicators of Public Transport Performance in Africa
Smart Growth Policies: An Evaluation Of Programs And Outcomes
Sustainable Urban Transport in Asia: Making the Vision a Reality
Ontario Community Sustainability Report
Global Urban Indicators: Selected Statistics
Global Cities Indicators Facility

2010
2009
2005
2007 2009 2008

The next step is to identify indicators used in transportation research. While the purpose of the plans/policies was to establish and measure system performance at the macro level, the transportation research gathered looks at both overall system-wide efficiencies as well as corridor-level measures. The studies consulted are listed in Table 4:

20

Y. Shah

Table 4: Indicators taken from Academic Research

Authors

Title

Aftabuzzaman et al.

Exploring the underlying dimensions of elements affecting traffic congestion relief impact of transit

Badami and Haider

An analysis of public bus transit performance in Indian cities

Gilbert and Tanguay Sustainable Transportation Performance Indicators Project

Haghshenas and Vaziri Urban sustainable transportation indicators for global comparison

Li and Wachs

A test of inter-modal performance measures for transit investment decisions

Litman

Developing Indicators for Comprehensive and Sustainable Transport Planning

Nicolas et al.

Towards sustainable mobility indicators: application to the Lyons conurbation

Tanguay et al.

Measuring the sustainability of cities: An analysis of the use of local indicators

Tiwari and Jain

Accessibility and safety indicators for all road users: case study Delhi BRT

Year 2011
2007 2000 2012 2000
2007
2003
2010
2012

Having compiled three lists of indicators; one from existing transportation plans, one from international development and NGO evaluation programs, and one based on transportation research, the next step is to develop a consolidated list of indicators that satisfy all three and assess the indicators according to availability, which will answer the second question for this paper: what kind of secondary data should be used in the absence of primary data? Statistics for the three sets of indicators are gathered for a number of cities based on readily available data to ascertain what performance measures can be utilized immediately. The list of indicators for which data is available determines the final shortlist of indicators for comparison for each group.
The majority of data is collected from two sources. The Mobility in Cities Database of the International Association of Public Transport (UITP) supplies statistics for 52 cities, of which 45
21

Y. Shah have sufficient information for the indicators needed for this project. Data on 14 cities in Latin America is taken from a report by the "Observatorio De Movilidad Urbana Para Amrica Latina" (Latin American Urban Mobility Observatory - translation by author) of the Corporacin Andina de Fomento (Andean Development Corporation) . Of the 15 cities selected for policy review to develop the indicators, six in total collect sufficient data to be included in the study. However, two are already listed in the UITP Database (London and Singapore). The remaining four cities; Auckland, New York, Sydney, and Toronto, are assessed according to information available on the internet from public sector and research organizations. The final number of cities assessed for this project based on data availability is 63.
Figure 1: Geographic distribution of selected cities The Mobility in Cities database is an update on a previous undertaking by the UITP titled "Millennium Cities Database for Sustainable Transport," conducted in 1995. Mobility in Cities captures statistics for 120 indicators from 53 cities, with a 90% collection rate. Published in 2005,
22

Y. Shah
the year of reference for the data is 2001. The "Observatorio De Movilidad Urbana Para Amrica
Latina" is a response to the lack of quantifiable data on the transportation systems in Latin
America. The 2010 report used as reference in this project is the first publication of this venture,
with the intention to continue to gather more data and build more robust analyses of Latin
American transportation networks. Data for the remaining cities were drawn from federal,
state/provincial, and municipal agencies; from sources such as censuses, policies, annual reports,
and technical studies.
The major constraint to the data is the variability in time periods of collection. The UITP
database is primarily referenced from 2001, data from the Andean Development Corporation
was sourced between 2007 and 2009, and data on the remaining cities sourced from a number
of different reports published by government agencies at various times (Auckland  2004-20111;
New York  2007-20122; Sydney  2006-20123; Toronto  2006-20124). Even more current
reports, however, are often extrapolations and projection from past numbers (for example,
statistics on many cities in the US refer to the 2001 Census).
An additional limitation, also related to the variability of the time of reference, is in the
quality of some of the data. Under Environmental and Resource Conservation, the 19 cities are
all missing one indicator each, due to gaps in both the ADC and UITP data. The reliability of the
1 Sources (Auckland): New Zealand Ministry of Transport (2009), New Zealand Ministry of Transport (2010, 2012), Auckland Regional Council (2009), Auckland Regional Council (2008), Auckland Council (2010); Auckland Regional Transport Authority (2012); Auckland Regional Transport Authority (ARTA) (2011); Jamieson (2007); Metcalfe, Fisher, Sherman, and Kuschel (2006) 2 Sources (New York):United States Census Bureau (2011), Metro Transportation Authority (MTA) (2012a, 2012b), Schrank, Lomax, and Eisele (2011), Federal Transit Administration (2010), Bureau of Labour Statistics (2010), City of New York (2007a), New York State Department of Transportation (2009) 3 Sources (Sydney): Bureau of Transport Statistics (2012a), Bureau of Transport Statistics (2012b), Australian Bureau of Statistics (2011b), New South Wales Government (2010a), New South Wales Government (2010c), Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal New South Wales (2011), Australian Bureau of Statistics (2011a) 4 Sources (Toronto): Statistics Canada (2006b), Statistics Canada (2006a), Toronto Transit Commission (2011), The Greater Toronto Transportation Authority (Metrolinx) (2008), ICF International (2007), Toronto Police Service (2011), The Greater Toronto Transportation Authority (Metrolinx) (2011), Statistics Canada (2009), City of Toronto (2007a, 2007b)
23

Y. Shah ERC indicators is questionable, as, while GHGs are all measured in kilograms (Kg) and energy use in mega joules (Mj), a stark variation exists between the UITP data and others. This is illustrated by the data for the GHG emissions of transport for Auckland, which, at 3,028 Kg/capita, are 32 times as high as the lowest performing city from the UITP database (Athens, with 93 kg/capita5). For those cities which were not supplied with emissions data in the Mobility in Cities dataset, the necessary statistics were drawn from a number of sources, including the International Association of Public Transport (UITP) (2009). The variability in the range of emissions from 2001 to 2009 may be a result of improved data gathering techniques pertaining to greenhouse gases over the years.
Having compiled the necessary data, the next step is to analyze the transportation plans and research to identify which indicators will be selected for the diagnosis. The final list of indicators to be used depends on the availability of data.
5 A number of cities listed under the UITP data have higher GHG emissions. The data for these cities was retrieved from International Association of Public Transport (UITP) (2009).
24

Y. Shah

Policy and Research Analysis

The initial review of the city plans is meant to identify the main issues, trends, and goals

of each plan to help frame the criteria for assessment. The definition of each category according

to the plans and a study by Cambridge Systematics (2000) is used to guide policy goals into a

specific category. The following table shows the breakdown by category, goal, and how many

cities identified with each goal:

Table 5: Goals in Urban Policy
Categories Affordability and Accessibility Improve access to daily destinations by all modes Provide affordable mobility Coordinate transportation and land use plans Mobility Reduce congestions, delays and travel time Encourage the use of and improve transit and active transport networks Provide for efficient freight travel Economic Development Facilitate economic growth through effective management of the transport network Quality of Life Protect and promote public health Respond to public expectations Address the mobility needs of the elderly, youth, and persons with special needs Environmental and Resource Conservation Improve air quality Advance environmental sustainability Reduce dependence on non-renewable resources Safety Reduce accidents Ensure personal security

Cities
8 6 4
10 9 4
7
9 3 8
12 7 2
9 5

25

Categories Operational Efficiency Provide an integrated public transport system Provide transportation system that is maintained, reliable, and efficient Ensure fiscal sustainability Infrastructure Condition and Performance Maintain infrastructure in good condition

Y. Shah
Cities
4 7 7
3

The most common goal across all the city plans is the improvement of air quality, followed by congestion reduction and improved mobility, and then equal references of improving active transport opportunities, promoting public health, and reducing accidents. Environmental concerns are most important to city agencies, followed by mobility, and then quality of life and safety.
However, a compilation of the indicators used to measure progress towards goals paints a different picture (for a complete list of indicators used in each set of policies or studies see Appendix I):

26

Table 6: Selected Indicators per Goal and Frequency of Use

Y. Shah

Goals Demand/Context Affordability and Accessibility Improve access to daily destinations by all modes
Provide affordable mobility Coordinate transportation and land use plans Mobility
Reduce congestions, delays and travel time Encourage the use of and improve transit and active transport networks Provide for efficient freight travel Economic Development Facilitate economic growth through effective management of the transport network Quality of Life Protect and promote public health Respond to public expectations Address the mobility needs of the elderly, youth, and persons with special needs

Indicators Total population
Transit coverage by population (% of people who live within one or two km of rapid transit) Average length of commute (minutes) Share of household income spend on transport (%) Length of roads per 1,000 people (Km)
Travel demand (The number of trips) Average speed of trip (km/hr) Transport trips by mode (% by mode)
Annual volume of container traffic (tonnes)
Cost of vehicle congestion (in USD)
Number of noise/vibration exceedances per year Public transport customer satisfaction (%) Share of transport facilities with step-free access (%)

Cities 3
1 5 2 1
7 4 7
3
2
1 3 2

Agencies Research Total 6 2 11
23 16 35
12
29 1 27 6 5 18
3
2
23 14 13

27

Goals

Indicators

Environmental and Resource Conservation

Improve air quality

Greenhouse gas emissions from passenger travel (Kg/capita)

Advance environmental sustainability

Annual energy consumption of transport (Mj)

Reduce dependence on nonrenewable resources

Bio and fossil fuel used per VKT or per capita (L)

Safety

Reduce accidents

Road fatalities

Ensure personal security

Crime rates on public transport (%)

Operational Efficiency

Provide an integrated public transport system

Provide a transportation system that Public transport capacity (Passenger-km) is maintained, reliable, and efficient

Ensure fiscal sustainability

Cost recovery from fares (Fare-box Recovery Ratio - %)

Infrastructure Condition and Performance

Maintain infrastructure in good condition

Percent of roads meeting a state of good repair (%)

Y. Shah
Cities Agencies Research Total

23 14 1
36 1

16 5
12
2 11 1

2 12
2

24 14
2

28

Y. Shah
Mobility indicators are the most cited, followed by safety indicators. Air quality and environmental indicators are only used in seven documents, while quality of life is measured in four. The low number of indicators for quality of life goals might speak to the difficulty of quantitative assessment of quality of life measures, but the same cannot be said of air quality indicators. Additionally, measurements of active transportation are generally cited under mobility improvements rather than air quality or quality of life measures. While air quality concerns top the list of goals in urban transportation plans, a relatively lesser emphasis is placed in research and policies reviewed to take measurements towards improvement.
The selection of headline indicators for use is based on two criteria: first, they have a high frequency of usage and second, they are used in both transportation plans and research. Some of the indicators are only available in one set of documents and are selected because no alternative is available.
The first set of indicators listed under "Demand/Context" help to determine the contextual basis for comparison, as indicated earlier in the discussion of South-South cooperation. The Green City Index developed by the Economist Intelligence Unit (2009) takes a similar approach, establishing socio-economic clusters within which candidate cities are grouped and compared.
In measuring accessibility, the most commonly cited indicator is public transport coverage by population, which only measures access to destinations via public transportation. Affordability is measured by percentage of income spent on transportation per household. Coordination between transportation and land use planning is a more difficult goal to measure, as most of the indicators cited (such as physical growth rate) do not directly relate between
29

Y. Shah
transport and land-use. Instead, Tomalty et al. (2007) suggest measuring the length of roads per 1000 people as a measure of density and sprawl, which takes into account both land development and transportation infrastructure.
While travel demand is the most cited indicator for measures of congestion, the indicator used in both policy and research is average speed of travel. There are some variations in how the indicator is used, however. Policy documents generally refer to average speed of personal motor vehicle travel, while in the research network speeds (average speeds by mode) are highlighted. Average speed of travel is a suitable measure because it also takes into account travel time and distance, both cited in six documents each.
Measures of the use of active transportation and transit networks are represented by the modal share of transport use, which is the most cited indicator in the study. Finally, although the international policy and transportation research reviewed in this study did not mention freight traffic, it is cited in three urban and regional transportation plans. Since freight traffic still contributes to overall transport volume, an indicator to measure the tonnage of cargo is preserved.
Direct economic development indicators are more difficult to measure, since most readily available data does not provide information on the economic benefits of transportation for specific cities. Gasoline prices are used as an indicator by San Francisco's MTC and Vancouver's Translink because the cost and consumption of fuel has a direct effect on transportation revenues (San Francisco and Vancouver collect gas taxes). New York City and Sydney measure the costs of congestion, which provides a baseline for the economic impacts of congestion. Benefits of transportation network improvements are mentioned in the Auckland
30

Y. Shah
and Houston transportation plans, but no data or actual metric is provided. As such, the headline indicator for economic development depends on the data available.
Quality of Life indicators, which are generally more qualitative and difficult to measure to begin with, provide no directly quantifiable headline indicators. Additionally, since public health issues are related to active transportation and air quality measures, indicators of public health rest in other categories. The simplest approach is to measure comfort levels with noise benchmarks. Public satisfaction with the transportation system conducted through surveys is one way that Johannesburg, London, and Ottawa measure public expectations. For physical accessibility, Litman (2007) and the City of Ottawa propose step-free access and number of specialized transit users. The London Mayor's Transport Strategy also proposes the use of stepfree access, but provides no means of measurement.
Air quality measurements are straightforward and general greenhouse gas emissions data is readily available. While the most cited indicator is general GHG emissions in tonnes, ideally transport-specific emissions should be used. This is reflected by the fact that transport emissions are cited in both policy and research. Transportation energy use and use of renewable fuels have only one indicator each; annual energy consumption of transport (in Gigajoules) and bio and fossil fuel used per vehicle-kilometers traveled (VKT) or per capita, respectively.
Transportation system safety measures are cited largely as two indicators; total casualties and total fatalities. Some studies listed highlight specific modal casualties, which is an approach preferred by Tiwari and Jain (2012) to assess risks imposed by different types of road users. However, the majority of studies and plans offer road fatalities as a suitable indicator to measure transportation safety. While security issues are mentioned throughout the literature, only one
31

Y. Shah plan (London) measures safety and security on the transit network. In the study by Tomalty et al. (2007), "crime codes per 100,000 people" is listed as an indicator of security.
For operational efficiency, no indicators can be identified for measuring progress towards an integrated transport network. For transportation system reliability, only indicators on public transit are available, where most plans and studies focus on system capacity utilization through passenger-kilometers traveled. Fiscal sustainability is measured either in terms of capital and operating investment or through fare-box recovery ratio. Because fare-box recovery is a measure of operating return on investment, it makes sense to utilize it as the headline indicator for fiscal sustainability. Fare-box recovery rates are collected commonly around the world, so data is easily accessible. The infrastructure condition and performance category lists three indicators for infrastructure maintenance that are all cited in city plans only. A headline indicator cannot be selected due to lack of data.
The final list of indicators drawn from research was compared to those in the UITP database and matching indicators were used for analysis. However, it should be noted that not all the cities are assessed according to 100% data. Only 13 of the 63 cities were provided with 100% data for all indicators, 35 with 94% data, and 15 with 88% data. Data availability also limited the final list of indicators to be used for assessment. Out of the final 20 indicators shortlisted for assessment, data was only available for 14. These 14 indicators are the shortlist of the final set of indicators to be used in this study, and are presented in the table 7:
32

Y. Shah

Category Demand/Context Affordability and Accessibility
Mobility
Operational Efficiency
Environmental and Resource Conservation Safety

Table 7: Final set of indicators to be used

Indicator

Unit

Data Availability

Population

Number

100%

Average duration of trip

Minutes

100%

Percent of monthly income spent on transport

Percent

78%

Length of road per thousand inhabitants

Kilometers

97%

Average speed of Trip

Kilometers/Hour

86%

Percentage of daily trips on foot and by bicycle

Percent

100%

Percentage of daily trips by private motorised modes

Percent

100%

Percentage of daily trips by public transport

Percent

100%

Annual public transport passenger-Km per inhabitant

Kilometers

95%

Recovery rate of public transport operating expenditure by farebox revenue

Percent

95%

Annual polluting emissions due to passenger transport per inhabitant

Kilograms/capita

71%

Annual energy consumption for passenger transport per inhabitant

Megajoules

78%

Passenger transport fatalities per million inhabitants

Number

97%

Sufficient data for Economic Development, Quality of Life, and System Condition and Performance indicators is not available. Under affordability and accessibility measures, very few cities publish data on population with access to different modes of transport. Cambridge Systematics (2000) provides a list of indicators which includes trip travel time. Due to the unavailability of data on access to services or the transportation network, trip travel time is used as a measure of convenience using the transportation network.
Data transportation affordability is limited to the average cost of trip or average fare of a public transport service. In order to calculate the percentage of monthly income spent on transportation, average monthly income is derived from Wellershoff, Hoefert, Hofer, and
33

Y. Shah Frhlich (2006). Share of income spent on transport is then calculated using the "transportation affordability index" provided in Carruthers, Dick, and Saurkar (2005).
Having shortlisted the final indicators for assessment from the long list in various transportation documents, the following section discusses the analysis and results of the benchmarking exercise.
34

Y. Shah

Analysis and Assessment

With headline indicators selected and the necessary data gathered, a z-score analysis is

conducted and initial results normalized according to each category: affordability and

accessibility, mobility, operational efficiency, environmental and resource conservation, and

safety. In order to establish a contextual relationship, the cities are grouped according to

population. The following table lists the four population groups that the cities are compared

within:

Table 8: Population Groups

Small (under 1 Million) Ghent, Belgium Graz, Austria Clermont-Ferrand, France Bern, Switzerland Geneva, Switzerland Bologna, Italy Nantes, France Marseilles, France Zurich, Switzerland Amsterdam, Netherlands Dubai, UAE Brussels, Belgium Helsinki, Finland Oslo, Norway

Medium (1-2 Million) Newcastle, UK Lille, France Bilbao, Spain
Seville, Spain Prague, Czech Republic Lyon, France Rotterdam, Netherlands Munich, Germany San Jos, Costa Rica Montevideo, Uruguay Len, Mexico Turin, Italy Auckland, New Zealand Vienna, Austria Warsaw, Poland Budapest, Hungary Copenhagen, Denmark Stockholm, Sweden

Large (2-5 Million) Glasgow, UK Hamburg, Germany Stuttgart, Germany
Manchester, UK Lisbon, Portugal Rome, Italy Curitiba, Brazil Caracas, Venezuela Singapore, Singapore Berlin, Germany Porto Alegre, Brazil Athens, Greece Guadalajara, Mexico Barcelona, Spain Sydney, Australia Belo Horizonte, Brazil

Very Large (5 Million Plus) Madrid, Spain Toronto, Canada Santiago, Chile
Hong Kong, China London, UK Bogot, Columbia Chicago, USA Lima, Peru Ro de Janeiro, Brazil Paris, France Moscow, Russia Buenos Aires, Argentina Sao Paulo, Brazil New York, USA Mxico City, Mexico

35

Y. Shah Having been grouped into population groups, cumulative scores for each category of indicators is calculated using the sum of all the z-scores in that category. Final results are normalized to a score between 0 (lowest) and 5 (highest) for all cities, so that the results are easier to rank and interpret. The final scores are provided in Figures 2 to 5:
Figure 2: Rankings for Cities with fewer than 1 million people Under the small cities group, Helsinki scores the highest, scoring above average in every category. Amsterdam follows second, with the strongest affordability and accessibility (AA) and mobility performance. The highest score for operational efficiency (OE) is not reserved for the highest ranking cities. Rather, Dubai scores very well in OE due to a very high fare-box recovery
36

Y. Shah ratio, denoting the city's public transport services operate at a profit. The city of Ghent lags behind in total due to lower than average scores across the board. However, data on share of income spent on transportation and number of fatalities on the transportation network are missing. The city's standing may change with further information.
Figure 3: Rankings for Cities with 1 to 2 million people Vienna scores the highest overall. However, in the individual categories, Vienna only ranks at the top in environmental and resource conservation (ERC), due to very low transport GHG emissions. The city of San Jose (Costa Rica) takes the top score for AA for very low
37

Y. Shah transportation costs per capita. The city of Bilbao ranks highest in the mobility category for a very high mode share for walking and cycling (49%). Budapest excels in OE due to a combination of high public transport capacity utilization and fare recovery (although the cities of San Jose and Montevideo both boast 100% fare recovery). Lyon and Munich tie for lowest fatality rates on the transportation network, thereby scoring the best for the safety category.
Auckland scores the lowest overall, with very low scores in AA as well as extremely low scores for mobility and ERC. Auckland's AA data indicates high travel times to reach services, higher than average cost of travel, and a very low road network density. Additionally, it also has the highest private vehicle mode share of this population group (80%). Furthermore, Auckland also has some of the highest emissions and energy use for transport in the entire sample of 63 cities.
38

Y. Shah
Figure 4: Rankings for cities with 2 to 5 million people In the large cities category, Berlin scores highest overall as well as in the ERC and safety categories. Caracas has the best AA ranking, due to very low costs of transportation in the city and a low road network density. In mobility, Guadalajara scores the highest due to an even distribution of modal share. Singapore scores highest for OE even though the city has the lowest fare-box recovery ratio. However, Singapore also has the greatest public transport capacity utilization of this population group. Sydney scores the lowest in this population group due to very low road network density, which ties into travel times that are roughly twice the average for
39

Y. Shah the group. This is not necessarily be due to congestion, as, even with a very high private vehicle mode share (68%), average travel speeds are not far below average.
Figure 5 displays the final population group, very large cities with more than 5 million people:
Figure 5: Rankings for cities with more than 5 million people Hong Kong scores highest in this group due to very strong performance in mobility, OE and safety, followed by ERC and AA. AA scores are not as high because the cost of travel in the city is only slightly below average. Overall highest score for AA is awarded to Moscow which, due to a very low road network density, allows residents to reach services much faster. The
40

Y. Shah highest performance in ERC is that of Buenos Aires. However, the city is missing data on the energy usage of transport, so there is a possibility of the city's performance in this category changing should the data become available. Chicago scores the lowest overall. The city suffers from a low road network density and high cost of travel per capita. However, average travel speeds are higher than the mean for the group, and the private vehicle mode share is also very high, meaning congestion may not be the primary factor in the low AA score. Chicago has the highest private vehicle mode share (88%) as well as the highest emissions and transportation energy use for this population group.
The figure 6 illustrates all the population groups graphically to represent the distribution of cities between demographics and transportation performance within each population group:
41

Y. Shah
Figure 6: Cities ranked by Population and Cumulative Scores
42

Y. Shah Although the scores establish a ranking, they are not meant to be interpreted as a final judgement of each city's transportation infrastructure. As an example, while Hong Kong has the highest mobility, OE, safety, and cumulative scores for its group, it does not rank amongst the highest in AA and ERC. In such a situation, clustering according to socio-economic characteristics of the cities is useful, so that Hong Kong may look to a city with a similar profile for inspiration on how best to tackle its problems in AA and ERC. While population groups provide one way to cluster the results according to context, another means of organizing the results is by GDP per capita6 (Siemens Canada Limited, 2010). The following table ranks scores by per capita GDP, and accounts for the population group (as indicated by the size of each circle):
6 Source: Data provided by Vivier and Pourbaix (2006) and Hawksworth, Hoehn, and Tiwari (2009) 43

Y. Shah
Figure 7: Cities ranked by GDP per Capita and Cumulative Scores
44

Y. Shah
The result of the graph shows that high earning cities do not necessarily function better, as a wide variety of incomes are distributed across the spectrum. In the very large cities population group, Hong Kong, standing at a little above average GDP per capita for the sample (at 27,600, for an average of 22,803), ranks the highest, followed by Moscow, which holds one of the lowest per capita GDP rates. Likewise, Curitiba ranks higher than Singapore, even though the GDP per capita in Curitiba is less than half that of Singapore. The lack of a strong relationship between high earnings and high cumulative scores may indicate that a city does not need to maintain high GDP rates in order to maintain an efficient and functional transportation network. However, further study is required to establish an exact relationship.
The figure 8 shows the distribution of city rankings geographically, with colors representing the range of scores and size of circles representing the population group. Scores are distributed using the equal interval attribute in ArcGIS. As illustrated, most of the cities are distributed in the 2.52  3.97 range of scores, with a few clear outliers (Hong Kong, Moscow, etc.). While cities in Europe take up the majority of the sample size, none of them rank within the lowest category. The addition of cities in Asia, Australasia, and North America may help balance the overall sample and provide a greater variation in scores.
City administrators and policy makers who wish to use this dataset to benchmark their transportation networks can do so using the averages and standard deviations for each population group in this study. It should be noted that the averages provided are the mean of means, since many of the original numbers are already averaged. Likewise, the standard deviation numbers provided are the standard deviation from the mean of means. The table 9 provides the data.
45

Y. Shah
Figure 8: City rankings by geographic distribution
46

Table 9: Data for calculating Z-Scores and Normalized Scores

Indicator(s)

Unit(s)

Affordability and Accessibility
Average duration of trip
% of monthly income spent on transportation Length of road per thousand inhabitants Mobility
Average speed of Trip
Daily trips on foot and by bicycle
Daily trips by private motorised modes
Daily trips by public transport
Operational Efficiency
Annual public transport passenger-Km per inhabitant Recovery rate of public transport operating expenditure by farebox revenue Environmental and Resource Conservation Annual polluting emissions due to passenger transport per inhabitant Annual energy consumption for passenger transport per inhabitant Safety
Passenger transport fatalities per million inhabitants

min % m
Km/h % % % Km %
Kg Mj

Under 1 Million Mean St.Dev.

25 9%
3,828

3 2%
1,351

31 31% 54% 15%
1,272
52%

8 8% 11% 6%
762
23%

63 15,321

21 2,844

65 49

1-2 Million Mean St.Dev.

25 11%
2,961

6 5%
1,028

29 31% 47% 23%
1,730
58%

7 9% 13% 14%
1,219
28%

459 14,255

894 8,883

57 36

2-5 Million Mean St. Dev.

28 15%
2,376

12 8%
1,621

30 27% 50% 22%
1,337
67%

6 10% 13%
9%
992
31%

333 15,613

604 6,123

64 35

5 Million and more

Mean

St. Dev.

36 12%
2,205

13 5%
1,392

27 24% 48% 27%
1,768
75%

6 12% 17% 13%
1,418
32%

627 14,443

786 11,897

77 50

Y. Shah
Normalization Min Max
-4.66 2.49
-6.45 4.55
-3.13 3.89
-6.19 1.93
-3.19 1.29

47

Y. Shah By using the mean and standard deviation for each population group provided in the table, transportation planners in any city around the world can participate in this exercise. The min and max normalization scores provided for each category will allow any city to be ranked within the results tables, so that planners can best identify where weaknesses in their local transportation networks exist and what cities they may look into for best practices. The comparison of the results of key indicators helps to establish a level of context amongst the transportation networks in cities around the world. Analyzing the variables that lead to high scores opens up the discussion on what constitutes the characteristics of an efficient and effective transportation network. The study intends to provide a framework for discussions that can lead to more targeted and resourceful approaches to identifying problems and devising solutions. By comparing the results of the rankings to contextual indicators such as demographic data (population, density, GDP, etc.), policy makers can better decide how to interpret the results and where to draw inspiration for solutions.
48

Y. Shah
Conclusion and Recommendations for Further Study
This paper begins by posing three questions for the development of a transportation network diagnosis: what needs to be measured, what kind of data should be used, and how should the results be compared to establish context? The answers are found through a thorough analysis of policy and research to identify the most appropriate key performance indicators to assess urban transportation at the global level. These indicators compose a diagnostic tool based on the framework of rapid assessment processes, providing policy makers and planners with a way to quickly identify weaknesses in transportation networks and develop targeted solutions. The diagnostic tool measures transportation performance according to a number of categories, identified through an analysis of urban transportation goals around the world; affordability and accessibility, mobility, operational efficiency, environmental and resource conservation, and safety. The plan/policy analysis also identifies the following additional categories; accessibility, economic development, quality of life, and infrastructure condition and performance. However, indicators measuring these categories are not selected due to lack of data. The final result is a set of 14 indicators measuring the performance of 63 cities.
Using a methodology derived from transportation research, the 63 cities are grouped according to population size. Each city is then scored based on cumulative results according to the five categories, with 0 set as the lowest score and 5 as the highest. Amongst cities with less than 1 million people, Helsinki scores the highest (4.48) and Ghent the lowest (2.02). In the population group of one to two million, Vienna has the best performing transportation network (3.91) and Auckland the lowest (1.32). In cities with two to five million, Berlin scores the highest
49

Y. Shah
(4.08) and Sydney the lowest (1.08). Finally, amongst cities with more than five million people, Hong Kong maintains the strongest performing network (4.69) while Chicago the weakest (1.93). Using the data provided for each of the population groups in this database, any city around the world can benchmark its transportation performance and compare to other cities of similar size.
The study has revealed that transportation policy and research have sufficient information needed for an agency to develop a benchmarking process. However, the weakness lies in the availability of secondary data that can be used to develop a comprehensive database. With available and reliable data, a number of analytical tools are available, the simplest of which was demonstrated for this project (The CDI of the Asian Development Bank uses indexes based on weighted scoring, for example). Armed with such tools, transportation planners around the world can conduct very rapid assessments of transportation systems to identify where major weaknesses lie and where to look for inspiration. By centralizing the information and making it publicly available, policy makers, community organizers, as well as interested citizens can participate in the exercise and provide input into the process. Such initiatives are already under way, with national level data provided by the World Bank and the United Nations (amongst others), and cities around the world launching open data platforms. Improved access to more reliable data will expand this tool and make it an effective means of continuous improvement for urban transportation networks around the world.
In order to further enhance the dataset and provide a better distribution of results, the following are recommended:
1. Data: The current number of indicators helps provide a sufficient performance benchmark based on currently available data. However, as illustrated by the initial policy
50

Y. Shah
analysis, additional data is needed to create a holistic picture of a transportation network. Statistics are needed for the remaining indicators to enhance the dataset: a. Accessibility  access to jobs and services is becoming a key driver in improving the
interplay between transportation networks and land development. Progress in the accessibility category can be a good indicator of the integration of transportation and land use. b. Economic development  provides a means to better frame the costs of congestion (in many cases, the costs of business as usual) as well as potential benefits from system improvements. c. Quality of life  will help to integrate universal design principles into the transportation network. d. Infrastructure condition and performance  tied to operational efficiency, accounts for the state of the physical assets and will help ensure that system infrastructure is maintained. 2. Sample Size: A geographically wider sample of cities will balance the indicators, which are currently more in line with statistics for European cities. As cities around the world improve data gathering techniques and expand their databases, perhaps a greater number of cities will be available for assessment.
The process developed in this project is able to stand on its own and be utilized immediately. Transportation planners can use this tool to identify priority problems and to place the performance of their transportation network in the right context. Increased use of tools and
51

Y. Shah processes such as the one presented in this paper can help harmonize available data around the world, thereby allowing anyone with access to the internet to partake in this exercise and help expand the dataset.
52

Y. Shah
References
Aftabuzzaman, M., Currie, G., & Sarvi, M. (2011). Exploring the underlying dimensions of elements affecting traffic congestion relief impact of transit. Cities, 28(1), 36-44.
APRS World. (2009). World map for APRS in ESRI Shapefile format. In world.zip (Ed.). Auckland Council. (2010). Monitor Auckland Retrieved 30/05/2012, from
http://monitorauckland.arc.govt.nz/ Auckland Regional Council. (2008). Auckland Sustainability Framework Headline Indicators 2008.
Regional Sustainable Development Forum. Auckland Regional Council. Auckland, New Zealand. Auckland Regional Council. (2009). Business and Economy: The Auckland Region. Auckland Regional
Economic Development Forum. Auckland Regional Council. Auckland, New Zealand. Auckland Regional Transport Authority. (2009). Our World Class City: Auckland Transport Plan 2009.
Auckland Regional Transport Authority. Auckland, New Zealand. Auckland Regional Transport Authority. (2012). Public Transport Patronage Reports: February 2012
Statistics Report. Auckland Transport. Auckland Council. Auckland, New Zealand. Auckland Regional Transport Authority (ARTA). (2011). Auckland Transport Annual Report 2011.
Transport. Auckland Council. Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2011a). 2011 Census QuickStats Retrieved 20/06/2012, from
http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/1GSYD ?opendocument&navpos=220 Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2011b). 6530.0 - Household Expenditure Survey, Australia: Summary of Results, 2009-10 Retrieved 21/06/2012, from http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/6530.0Main%20Features2200910?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=6530.0&issue=2009-10&num=&view= Badami, M. G., & Haider, M. (2007). An analysis of public bus transit performance in Indian cities. Transportation Research Part A, 41(10), 961-981. Berke, P. R., & Maria Manta, C. (2000). Are we planning for sustainable development?. An evaluation of 30 comprehensive plans. Journal of Planning Literature, 14(4). Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization. (2009). Journey to 2030: Transportation Plan of the Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization. Central Transportation Planning Staff. Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization. Boston, United States. Briassoulis, H. (2001). Sustainable Development and its Indicators: Through a (Planner's) Glass Darkly. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 44(3), 409-427. Bureau of Labour Statistics. (2010). Consumer Expenditures for the New York-Northern New Jersey Area: 2008-09. Department of Labour. United States of America. Bureau of Transport Statistics. (2012a). 2010/11 Household Travel Survey: Key Indicators for Sydney. Bureau of Transport Statistics. New South Wales Government. Sydney, Australia. Bureau of Transport Statistics. (2012b). NSW and Sydney Transport Facts. Bureau of Transport Statistics. New South Wales Government. Sydney, Australia. Cambridge Systematics. (2000). A guidebook for performance-based transportation planning. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. Carruthers, R., Dick, M., & Saurkar, A. (2005). Affordability of Public Transport in Developing Countries. Transport Sector Board. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. Washington D.C. City of Johannesburg. (2003). Integrated Transport Plan 2003/2008. Transportation. City of Johannesburg. Johannesburg, South Africa.
53

Y. Shah
City of New York. (2007a). Inventory of New York City Green-House Gas Emissions 2007 Office of LongTerm Planning and Sustainability. City of New York Mayor's Office of Operations. New York, USA.
City of New York. (2007b). PlaNYC: A Greener, Greater New York. Office of Long-Term Planning and Sustainability. City of New York. New York, United States of America.
City of Ottawa. (2008). Transportation Master Plan. Infrastructure Services and Community Sustainability. City of Ottawa. Ottawa, Canada.
City of Toronto. (2007a). Energy Efficiency and Beyond: Toronto's Sustainable Energy Plan. Energy Efficiency Office, Facilities & Real Estate Division. City of Toronto. Toronto, Canada.
City of Toronto. (2007b). Road Classification System Retrieved 24/06/2012 Corporacin Andina de Fomento (CAF). (2010). Observatorio De Movilidad Urbana Para Amrica Latina.
Infrastructure. Corporacin Andina de Fomento (CAF). Dimitriou, H. T., & Gakenheimer, R. A. (2011). Urban transport in the developing world : a handbook of
policy and practice. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Economist Intelligence Unit. (2009). European Green City Index. Retrieved from
http://www.siemens.com/entry/cc/en/greencityindex.htm ESRI. (2012). World Boundaries and Places Alternate. In World_Boundaries_and_Places_Alternate (Ed.),
ArcGIS: ESRI. Federal Transit Administration. (2010). National Transit Database Program Retrieved 12/05/2012, from
http://www.ntdprogram.gov/ntdprogram/data.htm Gilbert, R., & Tanguay, H. (2000). Sustainable Transportation Performance Indicators Project. Toronto,
Canada: Centre for Sustainable Transportation. Gleason, J. M., & Barnum, D. T. (1982). Toward Valid Measures of Public Sector Productivity:
Performance Measures in Urban Transit. Management Science, 28(4), 379-386. Greater London Authority. (2012). Mayor's Transport Strategy. Transport for London. Greater London
Authority. London, United Kingdom. Gudmundsson, H. (2001). Indicators and performance measures for Transportation, Environment and
Sustainability in North America: Report from a German Marshall Fund Fellowship 2000 (D. o. P. Analysis, Trans.) Research Notes from NERI No. 148: National Environmental Research Institute, Denmark. Gyimesi, K., Vincent, C., & Lamba, N. (2011). Frustration Rising: IBM 2011 Commuter Pain Survey. IBM. Retrieved from http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/us/en/traffic_congestion/ideas/ Haghshenas, H., & Vaziri, M. (2012). Urban sustainable transportation indicators for global comparison. Ecological Indicators, 15(1), 115-121. Hawksworth, J., Hoehn, T., & Tiwari, A. (2009). Global city GDP rankings 2008-2025. UK Economic Outlook November 2009. PriceWaterhouseCooper. United Kingdom. Hobbs, B. F., & Meier, P. (2000). Energy decisions and the environment : a guide to the use of multicriteria methods. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. Houston-Galveston Area Council. (2011). Bridging Our Communities: The 2035 Houston-Galveston Regional Transportation Plan Update. Transportation Policy Council. Houston-Galveston Area Council. Houston, United States of America. ICF International. (2007). Greenhouse Gases and Air Pollutants in the City of Toronto: Toward a Harmonized Strategy for Reducing Emissions. Toronto Environment Office. City of Toronto. Toronto, Canada. Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal New South Wales. (2011). CityRail and Metropolitan and Outer Metropolitan Bus Services: Prices and Services Report 2011. Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal of New South Wales. Ingram, G. K. (2009). Smart growth policies : an evaluation of programs and outcomes. Cambridge, Mass.: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
54

Y. Shah
International Association of Public Transport (UITP). (2009). Public Transport and CO2 Emissions. Media Backgrounder. International Association of Public Transport (UITP). Brussels, Belgium.
International Association of Public Transport (UITP), & African Association of Public Transport (UATP). (2010). Report on Statistical Indicators of Public Transport Performance in Africa. International Association of Public Transport (UITP). Brussels, Belgium.
Jamieson, K. (2007). Quality of Life in Twelve of New Zealand's Cities. Quality of Life Project. New Zealand.
Jeon, C. M., & Amekudzi, A. (2005). Addressing Sustainability in Transportation Systems: Definitions, Indicators, and Metrics. Journal of Infrastructure Systems, 11(1), 31-50.
Land Transport Authority. (2008). Land Transport Master Plan. Land Transport Authority. Ministry of Transport, Government of Singapore. Singapore.
Leitmann, J., & Program, U. M. (1993). Rapid urban environmental assessment: lessons from cities in the developing world. Washington, D.C.: Published for the Urban Management Programme by the World Bank.
Li, J., & Wachs, M. (2000). A test of inter-modal performance measures for transit investment decisions. Transportation, 27(3), 243-267.
Litman, T. (2007). Developing indicators for comprehensive and sustainable transport planning. Transportation Research Record.(2017), 10-15.
Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro). (2009). 2009 Long Range Transportation Plan. Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (Metro). Los Angeles, United States of America.
Metcalfe, J. L., Fisher, G. W., Sherman, M. W., & Kuschel, G. I. (2006). Auckland Air Emissions Inventory: 2004. Auckland Regional Council. Auckland, New Zealand.
Metro Transportation Authority (MTA), N. Y. C. (2012a). NYC Transit Performance Dashboard Retrieved 22/06/2012, from http://www.mta.info/persdashboard/agencies/nyctransit/dashboardytd_pf.htm
Metro Transportation Authority (MTA), N. Y. C. (2012b). Public Transportation for the New York Region Retrieved 22/06/2012, from http://www.mta.info/mta/network.htm
Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) of the San Francisco Bay Area. (2009). Change in Motion: Transportation 2035. Planning. Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC). San Francisco, United States of America.
New South Wales Government. (2010a). Greenhouse Gas Emissions Snapshot: 2036 Metropolitan Plan Review. Department of Planning. New South Wales Government. Sydney, Australia.
New South Wales Government. (2010b). Metropolitan Plan for Sydney 2036. Planning and Infrastructure. New South Wales Government. Sydney, Australia.
New South Wales Government. (2010c). Road Traffic Crashes in New South Wales. Centre for Road Safety. New South Wales Government. Sydney, Australia. Retrieved from http:
New York State Department of Transportation. (2009). National Household Travel Survey: Interim 2009 Comparison Report. Department of Transportation. New York State. New York, USA.
New Zealand Ministry of Transport. (2009). Transport Monitoring Indicator Framework (TMIF) Retrieved 25/05/2012, from http://www.transport.govt.nz/ourwork/tmif/
New Zealand Ministry of Transport. (2010). National Farebox Recovery Policy: Supplementary Information. Ministry of Transport. Government of New Zealand. New Zealand.
New Zealand Ministry of Transport. (2012). New Zealand Household Travel Survey. New Zealand: New Zealand Ministry of Transport.
Nicolas, J., Pochet, P., & Poimboeuf, H. (2004). Towards sustainable mobility indicators: application to the Lyons conurbation. Sage Urban Studies Abstracts, 32(2).
55

Y. Shah
Pai, M. (2007). India Transport Indicators. Center for Sustainable Transport India. Embarq: The WRI Institute for Sustainable Transport.
Partnership for Sustainable Urban Transport in Asia (PSUTA). (2007). Sustainable Urban Transport in Asia: Making the Vision a Reality. World Resources Institute.
Peters, J. R., Paaswell, R. E., & Berechman, J. (2008). Economic Competitiveness: Performance Measures for Transportation: University Transportation Research Center, The City College of New York.
Rittel, H. W. J., & Webber, M. M. (1973). Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning. Policy Sciences, 4(2), 155-169.
Sandercock, L. (1998). Towards cosmopolis : planning for multicultural cities. Chichester, England; New York: J. Wiley.
Schrank, D., Lomax, T., & Eisele, B. (2011). 2011 Urban Mobility Report. Texas Transportation Institute. United States of America.
Siemens Canada Limited. (2010). Complete Mobility in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area. Mobility Division. Siemens Canada Limited. Canada.
Statistics Canada. (2006a). Employed labour force by mode of transportation to work, by census metropolitan area. 2006 Census, from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sumsom/l01/cst01/labr88c-eng.htm
Statistics Canada. (2006b). Toronto, Ontario (Code3520): 2006 Community Profiles. 2006 Census Retrieved Catalogue no. 92-591-XWE, from http://www12.statcan.ca/censusrecensement/2006/dp-pd/prof/92591/details/page.cfm?Lang=E&Geo1=CD&Code1=3520&Geo2=PR&Code2=35&Data=Count&Sea rchText=Toronto&SearchType=Begins&SearchPR=01&B1=All&GeoLevel=PR&GeoCode=3520
Statistics Canada. (2009). Spending Patterns in Canada. Statistics Canada. Ottawa, Canada. Tanguay, G. A., Rajaonson, J., Lefebvre, J. F., & Lanoie, P. (2010). Measuring the sustainability of cities:
An analysis of the use of local indicators. Ecological Indicators, 10(2), 407-418. The City of Calgary. (2009). Calgary Transportation Plan. Transportation. City of Calgary. Calgary,
Canada. The Greater Toronto Transportation Authority (Metrolinx). (2008). The Big Move: Transforming
Transportation in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area. Policy, Planning & Innovation. Government of Ontario. Toronto, Canada. The Greater Toronto Transportation Authority (Metrolinx). (2011). 2011-2012 Business Plan. Policy, Planning & Innovation. Greater Toronto Transportation Authority (Metrolinx). Toronto, Canada. The South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority (Translink). (2008). Transport 2040; A Transportation Strategy for Metro Vancouver, Now and in the Future. Government of British Columbia. Vancouver, Canada. The World Bank, & Environmental Resource Management (ERM). (2008). Global Cities Indicators Facility Retrieved 19/01/2012, from http://www.cityindicators.org/Default.aspx The World Bank Institute. (2012). South-South Learning Retrieved 05/31/2012, from http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/south-south-learning Tiwari, G., & Jain, D. (2012). Accessibility and safety indicators for all road users: case study Delhi BRT. Journal of Transport Geography, 22(0), 87-95. Tomalty, R., Anielski, M., Alexander, D., Wilson, J., Jozsa, A., Haider, M., . . . Cartin-Artega, F. (2007). Ontario Community Sustainability Report - 2007. The Pembina Institute. Canada. Toronto Police Service. (2011). Annual Statistical Report. Toronto Police Service. Toronto, Canada. Toronto Transit Commission. (2011). 2011 TTC Operating Statistics Retrieved 22/06/2012, from http://www.ttc.ca/About_the_TTC/Operating_Statistics/2011.jsp lengin, F., Kabak, ., nsel, S., Aktas, E., & Parker, B. R. (2011). The competitiveness of nations and implications for human development. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, 45(1), 16-27.
56

Y. Shah United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat). (2009). Global Urban Indicators: Selected
Statistics. Global Urban Observatory. United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UNHabitat). United States Census Bureau. (2011). 2010 American Community Survey: Commuting to Work, from http://www.census.gov/acs/www/ Ville de Qubec. (2011). Sustainable Mobility Plan: Transportation for Better Living. Transport. Qubec, Canada. Vivier, J., & Pourbaix, J. (2006). Mobility in Cities Database. In I. A. o. P. T. (UITP) (Ed.). Brussels, Belgium: International Association of Public Transport (UITP). Wellershoff, K. W., Hoefert, A., Hofer, S., & Frhlich, D. (2006). Prices and Earnings: A comparison of purchasing power around the globe, 2006 edition. Wealth Management Research. UBS AG. Zrich. Westfall, M. S., & de Villa, V. A. (2001). Cities Data Book: Urban Indicators for Managing Cities. Asian Development Bank. Wong, C. (2006). Indicators for urban and regional planning : the interplay of policy and methods. London and New York: Routledge.
57

Y. Shah

Appendix I: Complete list of Indicators in policy and research documents.

Categories
Demand/Context Total population Motor Vehicle Population Population Density City GDP Average household income Car ownership (cars per household) Population by Sector Population growth rate (%) Percentage of population aged 65 or over Annual sale of motor vehicles (all types) City per capita income Population/Jobs Balance (Jobs/1000 People) Employment by sector Employment Density Labour Force
Affordability and Accessibility Access to daily destinations is improved by all modes
Average length of trip (minutes) Transit coverage by population Per cent of population/jobs within 400m of Primary Transit Network Job Accessibility (% of work trips within 60 minutes by transit) The average number of jobs within a 40-min transit trip and a 20-min auto trip Access to services (Local area score of average journey time by mode) Provide affordable mobility Percentage of household income spend on transport Transportation costs per household Total per capita transport expenditures Coordinate transportation and land use plans Land development (acres) Length of roads per 1,000 people (Km) Mobility Congestions, delays and travel time are reduced Travel demand (The number of trips) Average speed of trip Average Trip distance Total Motor VKT/VMT Total Lane Miles or Km Total length of transit service Average distance traveled per capita

Cities
3 2 2 1 1
2
2
1 2 2 2
5 1 2 2 2 2
2 2
2 1
7 4 4 5 4 3

Agencies 6 6 4 2 2 2 2
2
1 2 2

Research 2 4 2 3
1
1
3 2 1 2 2 1 3

Total
11 8 6 5 5 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
6 3 2
2 2
2
5 2 2
2 2
9 7 6 5 5 5 3

58

Y. Shah

Categories Congestion Time (Hours) Reduction in VMT and VHT in town centers Car use (annual passenger car km per capita) Auto occupancy rate (persons per vehicle) Number of single occupancy vehicle trips in the region Total length of surface rail Total length of underground metro
Encourage the use of and Improve the Transit and Active Transport networks
Transport trips by mode Transit Ridership Cycling/walking modal share (%) Transit mode split (%) Average Daily VKT on Transit Private Vehicles mode split (%) Completion of Urban Cycling Network (%) Change in transit volume minus change in auto traffic volume Passenger-km Transit use (annual transit passenger-km per capita) Efficient Freight Travel Annual volume of container traffic (tonnes) Economic Development Facilitate economic growth through effective management of the transport network Fuel prices at the pump Cost of vehicle congestion Annual Cost Savings from Improvements Quality of Life Protecting And Promoting Public Health Number of noise/vibration exceedances per annum Number of one hour NO2 exceedances (> 200 m/m3) per annum Sidewalk Coverage Respond to public expectations Public transport customer satisfaction The mobility needs of the elderly, youth, and persons with special needs are addressed Physical accessibility to the transport system (Step free access) Specialized transit usage (specialized transit riders per capita) Environmental and Resource Conservation Improve air quality GHG emissions (tonnes) Greenhouse gas emissions from passenger travel (kg per capita or tonnes) CO2 Emissions NOx emissions

Cities 2 2 2 2
7 5 6 6 2 3 2
3
2 2 2
1 1 2 3
2 1
3 2 4 3

59

Agencies 2 2 6 3 2 1 2
3

Research 2

Total 2 2 2 2 2 2 2

5 18 3 11 19
6 3 13 3 2 22 22
3

2 2 2
23 12
2
14
13 12
47 16 15 14

Y. Shah

Categories PM10 emissions PM 2.5 Emissions VOC Emissions CO Emissions NOx emissions by mode
Advance environmental sustainability Annual energy consumption of transport (Gj) Land consumption for transportation infrastructure per capita (M) Energy use per capita (Gj) Greenhouse gas emissions per unit of electrical power
Reduce dependence on non-renewable resources Bio and fossil fuel used per VKT and per capita
Safety Reduce Accidents
Road fatalities (number) Total casualties (fatal, serious and minor) Reported pedestrian collisions (number) Reported cyclist collisions (number) Security Crime rates on public transport (Crimes per million passenger journeys) Operational Efficiency An integrated public transport system The transportation system is maintained, reliable, and efficient Public transport capacity (Passenger-km) Fiscal Sustainability Cost recovery from Fares (Farebox Recovery Ratio) Operating investment (dollars per capita) Transport revenue and subsidies ($) Gross operating cost per passenger The ratio of transit maintenance and capital expenditures per capita to road infrastructure maintenance and capital costs per capita. Capital investment (dollars per capita) Funding allocated versus funding spent Real fares levels Revenue vehicle miles Local taxes (total, per resident and per employee) Infrastructure Condition and Performance Maintain infrastructure in good condition % of roads meeting a state of good repair Lane Miles Resurfaced Per Year Walking and cycling infrastructure condition

Cities 3 3 2 2 2
2 1 1
3 5 3 3 1
2 1 1 4 3
1 2 2
2 2 2

Agencies
1 1 6 2
2 1

Research 1 1 1
4 4
1 1

Total 4 3 3 3 2
5 4
3 2
2

2 11 3 10
3 3
1

24
14 34
4 3 33
2 2 2 22 22
2 2 2

60

Y. Shah

Appendix II: Cities assessed according to the source of data used

Amsterdam Athens
Barcelona Berlin Bern Bilbao
Bologna Brussels Budapest Chicago Clermont Ferrand Copenhagen Dubai Geneva Ghent

UITP Glasgow
Graz Hamburg Helsinki Hong Kong
Lille Lisbon London Lyons Madrid Manchester Marseilles Moscow Munich Nantes

Newcastle Oslo Paris
Prague Rome Rotterdam Sao Paulo Seville Singapore Stockholm Stuttgart Turin Vienna Warsaw Zurich

ADC Belo Horizonte
Bogot Buenos Aires
Caracas Ciudad de Mxico
Curitiba Guadalajara
Len Lima Montevideo Porto Alegre Ro de Janeiro San Jos Santiago

Various Sources Auckland New York Sydney Toronto

61

Y. Shah

Appendix III: Normalized Results

Cities
Ghent Graz Clermont Ferrand Bern Geneva Bologna Nantes Marseilles Zurich Amsterdam Dubai Brussels Helsinki Oslo Newcastle Lille Bilbao Seville Prague Lyon Rotterdam Munich San Jos Montevideo Len Turin Auckland Vienna Warsaw Budapest Copenhagen Stockholm Glasgow Hamburg Stuttgart Manchester Lisbon Rome Curitiba Caracas Singapore

Affordability and Accessibility 0.23 0.47 0.96 0.59 0.40 0.78 0.54 0.82 0.68 1.00 0.45 0.80 1.00 0.40 0.58 0.56 0.44 0.69 0.66 0.72 0.86 0.64 0.95 0.66 0.81 0.49 0.20 0.93 0.69 0.61 0.64 0.61 0.43 0.86 0.88 0.63 0.66 0.46 0.65 0.95 0.62

Mobility
0.25 0.70 0.37 0.90 0.59 0.40 0.35 0.51 0.87 1.00 0.27 0.47 0.91 0.62 0.51 0.36 0.88 0.51 0.70 0.46 0.59 0.77 0.62 0.47 0.67 0.42
0.70 0.79 0.64 0.81 0.65 0.36 0.63 0.62 0.31 0.53 0.42 0.79 0.52 0.71

Operational Efficiency 0.26 0.64 0.23 0.68 0.28 0.33 0.25 0.33 0.66 0.32 0.69 0.31 0.66 0.61 0.57 0.24 0.35 0.62 0.33 0.25 0.62 0.58 0.55 0.56 0.21 0.37 0.47 0.57 0.74 0.49 0.51 0.39 0.44 0.38 0.47 0.51 0.45 0.51 0.44 0.54

Environmental and Resource Conservation 0.57 0.94 0.67 0.75 0.81 0.94 0.71 0.79 0.63 0.94 0.64 0.58 1.00 0.69 0.81 0.86 0.82 0.86 0.80 0.84 0.80 0.56 0.81 0.79 0.78 0.89 0.90 0.83 0.82 0.79 0.77 0.79 0.85 0.72 0.84 0.89 0.82 0.77 0.78 0.79

Safety
0.71 0.83 0.49 0.85 0.82 0.56 0.71 0.72 0.80 0.86 0.09 0.80 0.91 0.83 0.92 0.91 0.73 0.43 0.71 0.93 0.86 0.93 0.73 0.40 0.17 0.46 0.76 0.90 0.71 0.67 0.77 0.84 0.79 0.90 0.76 0.85 0.66 0.43 0.96 0.74 0.75

Cumulative
2.02 3.58 2.73 3.77 2.91 3.01 2.56 3.17 3.64 4.12 2.13 2.96 4.48 3.16 3.39 2.95 3.22 2.47 3.49 3.28 3.35 3.50 3.69 2.86 2.99 2.46 1.32 3.91 3.59 3.49 3.51 3.37 2.76 3.68 3.35 3.10 3.25 2.58 3.67 3.43 3.41

62

Y. Shah

Cities
Berlin Porto Alegre Athens Guadalajara Barcelona Sydney Belo Horizonte Madrid Toronto Santiago Hong Kong London Bogot Chicago Lima Ro de Janeiro Paris Moscow Buenos Aires Sao Paulo New York Ciudad de Mxico

Affordability and Accessibility 0.94 0.55 0.66 0.61 0.77 0.77 0.45 0.08 0.63 0.88 0.81 0.85 0.33 0.83 0.43 0.70 0.92 0.77 0.77 0.68 0.63

Mobility
0.81 0.73 0.32 0.91 0.71 0.25 0.78 0.64 0.18 0.61 0.99 0.62 0.46 0.20 0.14 0.24 0.69 0.95 0.29 0.69 0.48 0.43

Operational Efficiency 0.41 0.48 0.38 0.53 0.48 0.25 0.49 0.44 0.48 0.31 1.00 0.55 0.46 0.19 0.43 0.43 0.35 0.72 0.16 0.49 0.33 0.35

Environmental and Resource Conservation 0.92 0.75 0.86 0.74 0.85 0.05 0.77 0.85 0.60 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.95 0.10 0.92 0.92 0.85 0.82 0.98 0.83 0.88 0.92

Safety
1.00 0.82 0.63 0.11 0.58 0.53 0.89 0.74 0.90 0.82 0.92 0.87 0.75 0.70 0.77 0.76 0.76 0.85 0.75 0.57
0.55

Cumulative
4.08 3.33 2.84 2.90 3.39 1.08 3.69 3.12 2.23 3.31 4.69 3.70 3.47 1.53 3.10 2.78 3.35 4.26 2.96 3.35 2.38 2.89

63

Y. Shah

Appendix IV: Raw Data

Indicator(s)

Demand/ Context Population

Affordability and Accessibility

Average duration
of trip

% of monthly income spent on transport

Length of road per
1000 inhabitants

Unit(s) Ghent Graz Clermont Ferrand Bern Geneva Bologna Nantes Marseilles Zurich Amsterdam Dubai Brussels Helsinki Oslo
Mean Standard Dev Newcastle Lille Bilbao Seville Prague Lyon Rotterdam Munich San Jos Montevideo Len Turin Auckland Vienna Warsaw Budapest Copenhagen Stockholm
Mean

226,000 226,000 264,000 293,000 420,000 434,000 555,000 800,000 809,000 850,000 910,000 964,000 969,000 981,000 621,500 303,633 1,080,000 1,100,000 1,120,000 1,120,000 1,160,000 1,180,000 1,180,000 1,250,000 1,286,877 1,325,968 1,360,310 1,470,000 1,486,000 1,550,000 1,690,000 1,760,000 1,810,000 1,840,000 1,376,064

min 31.00 28.00 19.25 27.00 27.50 25.50 24.00 26.50 22.00 23.00 25.00 28.50 21.00 25.00
25 3 22.00 26.00 30.60 29.00 22.50 26.50 11.00 32.50 20.74 16.98 24.95 33.25 28.04 24.00 24.00 29.50 25.00 29.50 25

%
9% 10%
10% 8% 13% 8% 8% 10% 9% 2%
7%
14% 10%
11% 3% 21% 11%
15% 8% 17% 12% 8% 9% 11%

m 5,480 4,400 3,400 3,920 4,900 2,490 5,410 1,630 4,700 2,750 3,100 1,940 3,610 5,860 3,828 1,351 4,120 3,480 4,360 2,020 2,910 2,470 4,070 1,830 3,448 2,271 1,946 2,710 4,927 1,810 1,680 2,430 3,850
2,961

Mobility

Average speed of
Trip

% of daily trips on foot and by
bicycle

% of daily trips by private motorised modes

Km/h 22 27 25 34 26 18 26 24 41 33 45 29 39 43 31 8 35 30 35 22 29 27 28 35
18 26 24 28 29 22 46 34 29

% 30% 35% 33% 39% 34% 29% 23% 35% 31% 51% 16% 28% 29% 26% 31% 8% 27% 31% 49% 42% 21% 33% 42% 38% 24% 27% 39% 25% 16% 30% 20% 23% 39% 31% 31%

% 65% 46% 61% 40% 51% 57% 64% 54% 46% 34% 77% 59% 44% 59% 54% 11% 57% 63% 35% 48% 36% 54% 48% 41% 42% 54% 32% 54% 80% 36% 29% 33% 49% 47% 47%

% of daily trips by public transport
% 5% 18% 6% 21% 15% 14% 13% 11% 23% 15% 7% 14% 27% 15% 15% 6% 16% 6% 16% 10% 43% 13% 10% 22% 34% 19% 29% 21% 4% 34% 52% 44% 12% 22% 23%

Operational Efficiency

Annual public transport
passenger-Km per inhabitant

Farebox recover y ratio

Km 959 1,580 423 2,670 724 642 642 581 2,460 1,220 527 1,400 2,200 1,780 1,272 762 976 472 1,150 422 4,460 776 836 2,910 1,059 1,168 913 930
2,350 3,270 3,640 1,630 2,450 1,730

% 31% 75% 43% 48% 42%
39% 54% 50% 33% 113% 27% 59% 63% 52% 23% 99% 47% 52% 1% 31%
39% 64% 100% 90% 100% 30% 44% 49% 46% 72% 68% 54% 58%

Environmental and Resource Conservation

Safety

Annual polluting emissions due to passenger transport
per inhabitant Kg 86 36 83
25 71 80 74
69 41 66 63 21 35 62
67
1,390 141 263 326 56 3,028 11
86 42 459

Annual energy consumption for passenger transport per
inhabitant
Mj 16,700 14,900 14,700 15,700 19,200 10,100 14,200 13,300 18,400 11,100 18,100 18,800 12,800 16,500 15,321 2,844 15,100 11,100 9,910 7,450 11,800 12,500 11,800 19,700
9,000 43,742 9,040 9,090 10,000 15,800 17,800 14,255

Passenger transport fatalities
per million inhabitants
40 114 35 41 99 65 63 45 33 203 46 21 39 65 49 23 25 54 103 58 22 34 22 54 108 143 98 50 26
63 47 36 57

64

Standard Dev Indicator(s)

259,619
Demand/ Context Population

6 5% 1,028 Affordability and Accessibility

Average duration
of trip

% of monthly income spent on transport

Length of road per
1000 inhabitants

Unit(s) Glasgow Hamburg Stuttgart Manchester Lisbon Rome Curitiba Caracas Singapore Berlin Porto Alegre Athens Guadalajara Barcelona Sydney Belo Horizonte
Mean Standard Dev Madrid Toronto Santiago Hong Kong London Bogot Chicago Lima Ro de Janeiro Paris Moscow Buenos Aires Sao Paulo New York Ciudad de Mxico
Mean Standard Dev No. of Indicators Data Availability

2,100,000 2,370,000 2,380,000 2,510,000 2,680,000 2,810,000 2,872,486 3,140,076 3,320,000 3,390,000 3,410,676 3,900,000 4,374,721 4,390,000 4,391,674 4,803,198 3,302,677 847,874 5,420,000 5,583,064 6,038,971 6,720,000 7,170,000 7,823,957 8,180,000 8,482,619 10,689,406 11,100,000 11,400,000 13,267,181 18,300,000 18,852,000 19,239,910 10,551,141 4,837,946
63 100%

min 22.50 26.00 18.00 21.00 40.00 40.00 14.37 28.91 33.00 23.50 16.06 37.00 26.66 29.85 59.25 17.20
28 12 29.50 82.00 37.15 33.50 29.00 30.66 35.55 34.79 23.68 33.50 29.00 31.05 40.00 34.60 38.93 36 13 63 100%

%
5%
14% 16% 25% 6% 21% 7% 26% 10% 18% 9% 16% 26% 15% 8% 12% 13% 13% 11% 9% 11% 14% 8% 28% 12% 11% 5% 7% 14% 7% 12% 5% 49 78%

m 5,800
1,190 3,700 889 2,800 2,324 878 940 1,570 2,904 2,310 2,525 2,100 5,475 237 2,376 1,621 4,870 2,866 1,887 284 2,030 990 4,770 1,457 1,438 1,980 406 3,391 1,960 1,433 3,312 2,205 1,392
61 97%

7 9%

13% 14%

Mobility

Average speed of
Trip

% of daily trips on foot and by
bicycle

% of daily trips by private motorised modes

Km/h 33 31 42 32 24 26 19
32 33
27
35 28
30 6 34 19 18 27 30 26 34
32 33
21 31 19 27 6 54 86%

% 24% 37% 30% 23% 25% 24% 42% 18% 14% 36% 32% 8% 39% 34% 19% 36% 27% 10% 26% 6% 37% 38% 31% 18% 6% 26% 37% 36% 24% 9% 37% 7% 25% 24% 12% 63 100%

% 66% 47% 59% 68% 48% 56% 28% 54% 45% 39% 42% 64% 30% 47% 68% 38% 50% 13% 51% 71% 36% 16% 50% 57% 88% 53% 45% 46% 26% 40% 34% 61% 51% 48% 17% 63 100%

% of daily trips by public transport
% 11% 16% 11% 9% 28% 20% 30% 27% 41% 25% 27% 28% 30% 19% 12% 26% 22% 9% 22% 23% 27% 46% 19% 25% 6% 21% 18% 18% 49% 51% 29% 32% 23% 27% 13% 63 100%

65

1,219

28%

Operational Efficiency

Annual public transport
passenger-Km per inhabitant

Farebox recover y ratio

Km 978 1,570 1,070 561 2,030 2,610 694 219 4,070 1,840 657 890 840 1,400
621 1,337 992 2,330
949 3,700 2,520 803 700 511 511 2,170 5,340 694 2,170 1,770 584 1,768 1,418
60 95%

% 65% 58% 61% 96% 59% 29% 100% 100% 1% 43% 96% 66% 100% 71% 25% 98% 67% 31% 61% 82% 63% 157% 81% 100% 42% 100% 100% 46% 57% 36%
49% 81% 75% 32% 60 95%

894 8,883 Environmental and Resource Conservation

Annual polluting emissions due to passenger transport
per inhabitant
Kg 40 27 53 39
48 303 231
37 406 96 458
2,277 315 333 604 53 1,533 384 378 29 405 2,910 569 561 77
186
530 543 627 786 48 76%

Annual energy consumption for passenger transport per
inhabitant Mj
17,000 14,400 20,700 14,600 9,220 15,400
14,200 10,700
13,100
11,000 31,423
15,613 6,123 15,100 16,713
4,850 14,700
43,600
14,600 8,530
7,560 4,335
14,443 11,897
49 78%

36 Safety

Y. Shah

Passenger transport fatalities
per million inhabitants

53 35 57 42 73 108 26 60 58 19 47 77 158 84 93 37 64 35 71 35 53 30 42 69 80 63 67 66 47 69 109 236 113 77 50 61 97%

Y. Shah
66

